.TH NETLOOM 1 "March 2026" "netloom 1.9.5" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
netloom \- shared command-line interface for plugin-backed network APIs.

.SH SYNOPSIS
.B netloom
[\fIGLOBAL-OPTIONS\fR] \fIMODULE SERVICE ACTION\fR [\fIKEY=VALUE\fR ...]

.br
.B netloom
\fBload\fR [\fBlist\fR|\fBshow\fR|\fIPLUGIN\fR]

.br
.B netloom
\fBserver\fR [\fBlist\fR|\fBshow\fR|\fBuse\fR \fIPROFILE\fR]

.br
.B netloom
\fBcache\fR [\fBclear\fR|\fBupdate\fR]

.br
.B netloom
[\fB--help\fR|\fB?\fR]

.br
.B netloom
\fB--version\fR

.SH DESCRIPTION
.B netloom
provides a common CLI surface for vendor-specific network API plugins.

The shared runtime handles plugin selection, profile switching, cache
management, output formatting, logging, and generic request options. The exact
modules, services, actions, and request fields available under
.BR "netloom <module> <service> <action>" ,
however, come from the active plugin and whatever API documentation that plugin
discovers from the selected server.

This manual is the shared reference. Provider-specific behavior belongs in
plugin manuals such as
.BR netloom-clearpass (7).

.SH BUILT-IN COMMANDS
.TP
.B netloom load <plugin>
Persist the active plugin used by later plugin-backed commands.

.TP
.B netloom load list
List installed or configured plugins.

.TP
.B netloom load show
Show the currently selected plugin.

.TP
.B netloom server list
List configured profiles for the active plugin.

.TP
.B netloom server show
Show the current profile and the config files that affect it.

.TP
.B netloom server use <profile>
Select the active profile inside the active plugin.

.TP
.B netloom cache update
Refresh the local API catalog for the active plugin.

.TP
.B netloom cache clear
Remove the cached API catalog for the active plugin.

.SH COMMAND MODEL
The general plugin-backed form is:

.PP
.EX
netloom <module> <service> <action> [--key=value ...]
.EE

Common action names include:

.TP
.B list
List a collection. Often equivalent to
.B get --all
when the plugin exposes both.

.TP
.B get
Retrieve one resource or, with
.BR --all ,
a collection.

.TP
.B add
Create a resource.

.TP
.B update
Patch an existing resource.

.TP
.B replace
Replace an existing resource.

.TP
.B delete
Delete an existing resource.

.TP
.B copy
Copy matching resources from one profile to another when supported by the
active plugin.

.TP
.B diff
Compare matching resources between two profiles when supported by the active
plugin.

Modules, services, actions, selectors, and request metadata are discovered
dynamically and may differ by plugin, server version, and enabled API surface.

.SH PLUGINS
Plugins provide vendor-specific authentication, discovery, payload handling,
normalization, and documentation while reusing the shared
.B netloom
runtime.

At least one plugin must be selected before running plugin-backed commands:

.PP
.EX
netloom load clearpass
.EE

For provider-specific examples, cache behavior, and authentication details, use
the relevant plugin manual in addition to dynamic help.

.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
.BI --log-level= LEVEL
Set the runtime log level. Typical values are
.BR debug ,
.BR info ,
.BR warning ,
.BR error ,
and
.BR critical .

.TP
.B --console
Also print response output to the terminal.

.TP
.BI --out= FILE
Write output to an explicit file instead of using a generated default path.

.TP
.BI --data-format= FORMAT
Choose output format. Supported values are
.BR json ,
.BR csv ,
and
.BR raw .

.TP
.BI --csv-fieldnames= FIELDS
Comma-separated field order for CSV output.

.TP
.BI --file= FILE
Load JSON or CSV input for write or bulk-style actions.

.TP
.BI --api-token= TOKEN
Use an existing bearer token instead of logging in through the plugin.

.TP
.BI --token-file= FILE
Read a bearer token from a file.

.TP
.BI --catalog-view= visible|full
Choose whether help, completion, and action discovery use the default visible
catalog or the full retained discovered catalog.

.TP
.BI --limit= N
Set page size when supported by the endpoint.

.TP
.BI --offset= N
Set a collection offset when supported by the endpoint.

.TP
.BI --sort= FIELD
Set server-side sort when supported by the endpoint.

.TP
.BI --filter= JSON|FIELD:OP:VALUE
Set a server-side filter when supported by the endpoint.

.TP
.BI --calculate-count= true|false
Request a total-count style response when supported by the endpoint.

.TP
.BI --encrypt= enable|disable
Control masking of secret values in saved or logged output.

.TP
.B --decrypt
Disable output masking and show secrets in output.

.TP
.BR --help ", " ?
Show context-aware help.

.TP
.B --version
Show version.

.SH FILTER EXPRESSIONS
When a plugin supports server-side filtering,
.B netloom
accepts either shorthand expressions or raw JSON expressions.

Shorthand syntax uses:

.PP
.EX
FIELD:OP:VALUE
.EE

Common operators include:

.PP
.EX
equals
not-equals
contains
in
not-in
gt
gte
lt
lte
exists
.EE

Common shorthand examples:

.PP
.EX
--filter=name:equals:TEST
--filter=name:contains:guest
--filter=id:in:1,2,3
--filter=enabled:exists:true
.EE

Equivalent JSON patterns commonly include:

.PP
.EX
{"key":{"$eq":"value"}}
{"key":{"$ne":"value"}}
{"key":{"$contains":"value"}}
{"key":{"$in":["value1","value2"]}}
{"key":{"$nin":["value1","value2"]}}
{"key":{"$gt":"value"}}
{"key":{"$gte":"value"}}
{"key":{"$lt":"value"}}
{"key":{"$lte":"value"}}
{"key":{"$regex":"regex"}}
{"key":{"$exists":true}}
{"key":{"$exists":false}}
{"$and":[filter1,filter2]}
{"$or":[filter1,filter2]}
{"$not":{filter}}
.EE

For advanced cases, pass raw JSON such as:

.PP
.EX
--filter='{"name":{"$contains":"guest"}}'
--filter='{"$and":[{"status":{"$eq":"Known"}},{"enabled":{"$exists":true}}]}'
.EE

Shell quoting matters because JSON expressions are passed as strings.

.SH CATALOG VIEWS
Some plugins retain more discovered metadata than they expose by default.
When that happens,
.B --catalog-view=visible
shows the normal operator-facing subset, while
.B --catalog-view=full
shows the full retained discovery data.

This affects dynamic help, completion, and command validation rather than just
presentation.

Typical troubleshooting flow:

.PP
.EX
netloom --catalog-view=full ?
netloom --catalog-view=full <module> <service> ?
.EE

.SH OUTPUT
By default,
.B netloom
writes response files under its state and output directories. Default generated
filenames include timestamps so repeated commands do not overwrite earlier
artifacts.

Supported output formats are:

.TP
.B json
Pretty-printed JSON output.

.TP
.B csv
CSV output for list-style data.

.TP
.B raw
Raw text or binary output, commonly used for export and download endpoints.

For binary responses,
.B netloom
may automatically select raw output and preserve the filename provided by the
server.

.SH ENVIRONMENT
.TP
.B NETLOOM_ACTIVE_PROFILE
Default active profile for the selected plugin.

.TP
.B NETLOOM_VERIFY_SSL
Enable or disable TLS certificate verification.

.TP
.B NETLOOM_TIMEOUT
HTTP timeout in seconds.

.TP
.B NETLOOM_LOG_LEVEL
Default log level.

.TP
.B NETLOOM_DATA_FORMAT
Default output format.

.TP
.B NETLOOM_CONSOLE
Enable console output by default.

.TP
.B NETLOOM_ENCRYPT_SECRETS
Mask secret values by default.

.TP
.B NETLOOM_CACHE_DIR
Override the cache directory.

.TP
.B NETLOOM_STATE_DIR
Override the state directory.

.TP
.B NETLOOM_OUT_DIR
Override the response output directory.

.TP
.B NETLOOM_APP_LOG_DIR
Override the application log directory.

.TP
.B NETLOOM_CONFIG_DIR
Override the base configuration directory.

Plugin manuals may define additional provider-specific variables.

.SH FILES
.TP
.B ~/.config/netloom/config.env
Stores the active plugin selection.

.TP
.B ~/.config/netloom/plugins/<plugin>/
Plugin-specific configuration root.

.TP
.B ~/.cache/netloom/
Default cache directory on Linux when XDG-style defaults are used.

.TP
.B ~/.local/state/netloom/
Default state directory on Linux when XDG-style defaults are used.

.TP
.B ~/.local/state/netloom/responses/
Default response output directory.

.TP
.B ~/.local/state/netloom/logs/
Default log directory.

.SH COMPLETION AND HELP
Completion quality depends on the local API catalog. If module or service names
look incomplete, refresh the cache:

.PP
.EX
netloom cache update
.EE

Dynamic help is available at several levels:

.PP
.EX
netloom ?
netloom <module> <service> ?
netloom <module> <service> <action> ?
.EE

.SH BASH COMPLETION
The repository includes a Bash completion script at:

.PP
.EX
scripts/netloom-completion.bash
.EE

Run it once for the current shell session:

.PP
.EX
source /path/to/netloom/scripts/netloom-completion.bash
.EE

One simple persistent setup is:

.PP
.EX
mkdir -p ~/.bash_completion.d
cp /path/to/netloom/scripts/netloom-completion.bash ~/.bash_completion.d
.EE

Then load files from that directory in
.B ~/.bashrc
or the equivalent shell startup file:

.PP
.EX
if [ -d "$HOME/.bash_completion.d" ]; then
  for f in "$HOME"/.bash_completion.d/*; do
    [ -r "$f" ] && source "$f"
  done
fi
.EE

Completion quality depends on the local cache. If discovered modules or
services look incomplete, run:

.PP
.EX
netloom cache update
.EE

.SH EXAMPLES
Select a plugin and refresh discovery metadata:

.PP
.EX
netloom load clearpass
netloom cache update
.EE

Switch the active profile:

.PP
.EX
netloom server use dev
.EE

List resources through the active plugin:

.PP
.EX
netloom identities endpoint list --limit=10
.EE

Inspect one object directly in the terminal:

.PP
.EX
netloom policyelements network-device get --id=1001 --console
.EE

Use dynamic help for a discovered action:

.PP
.EX
netloom policyelements network-device add ?
.EE

.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.

.TP
.B non-zero
Failure, invalid arguments, authentication failure, network failure, or API
error.

.SH SEE ALSO
.BR netloom-clearpass (7),
.BR python (1),
.BR curl (1)
