.TH NETLOOM-CLEARPASS 7 "March 2026" "netloom 1.10.2" "Miscellaneous Information Manual"
.SH NAME
.PP
netloom-clearpass \- ClearPass plugin reference for netloom
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
.EX
netloom load clearpass
netloom server use <profile>
netloom cache update
netloom <module> <service> <action> [options]
.EE
.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
The plugin targets HPE Aruba ClearPass Policy Manager and discovers the API surface dynamically from the documentation endpoints exposed by the selected server. Available modules, services, actions, request fields, and response metadata can therefore vary between deployments and software versions.
.PP
Use this guide for ClearPass-specific behavior that does not belong in the shared netloom(1) reference: configuration layout, authentication methods, discovery workflow, privilege-aware catalog behavior, filtering conventions, and the profile-to-profile copy and diff workflows.
.SH CONFIGURATION
.PP
The ClearPass plugin stores configuration under:
.PP
.EX
~/.config/netloom/plugins/clearpass/
.EE
.PP
Important files and directories:
.IP "\[bu]" 2
defaults.env: Plugin-wide defaults such as the active profile, TLS verification, timeout, and path overrides.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
profiles/<profile>.env: Per-profile connection settings such as NETLOOM_SERVER.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
credentials/<profile>.env: Per-profile authentication settings such as NETLOOM_CLIENT_ID, NETLOOM_CLIENT_SECRET_REF, NETLOOM_CLIENT_SECRET, NETLOOM_API_TOKEN, or NETLOOM_API_TOKEN_FILE.
.PP
Typical layout:
.PP
.EX
~/.config/netloom/plugins/clearpass/defaults.env
~/.config/netloom/plugins/clearpass/profiles/<profile>.env
~/.config/netloom/plugins/clearpass/credentials/<profile>.env
.EE
.PP
Minimal profile connection settings:
.PP
.EX
NETLOOM_SERVER=clearpass.example.com:443
.EE
.PP
Minimal OAuth client credentials:
.PP
.EX
NETLOOM_CLIENT_ID=<client-id>
NETLOOM_CLIENT_SECRET_REF=<profile>/client-secret
.EE
.PP
Direct NETLOOM_ environment variables still override profile files when set in the current shell session.
.SH AUTHENTICATION
.PP
The ClearPass plugin supports three practical authentication paths:
.IP "\[bu]" 2
OAuth client credentials via NETLOOM_SERVER, NETLOOM_CLIENT_ID, and either NETLOOM_CLIENT_SECRET_REF or NETLOOM_CLIENT_SECRET
.IP "\[bu]" 2
Direct bearer token via NETLOOM_API_TOKEN
.IP "\[bu]" 2
Token file via NETLOOM_API_TOKEN_FILE
.PP
When a login secret is needed, the runtime checks in this order:
.IP "1." 4
NETLOOM_API_TOKEN
.IP "2." 4
NETLOOM_API_TOKEN_FILE
.IP "3." 4
keychain-resolved NETLOOM_CLIENT_SECRET_REF
.IP "4." 4
plaintext NETLOOM_CLIENT_SECRET
.SH KEYCHAIN SETUP
.PP
When NETLOOM_CLIENT_SECRET_REF is configured, the runtime resolves the client secret from the OS keychain with:
.IP "\[bu]" 2
service: netloom/clearpass
.IP "\[bu]" 2
username: the literal value of NETLOOM_CLIENT_SECRET_REF
.PP
Typical setup:
.PP
.EX
python -m keyring set netloom/clearpass <profile>/client-secret
.EE
.PP
.EX
NETLOOM_CLIENT_ID=<client-id>
NETLOOM_CLIENT_SECRET_REF=<profile>/client-secret
.EE
.PP
To inspect the backend that Python keyring sees:
.PP
.EX
python -m keyring diagnose
python -m keyring --help
.EE
.PP
To verify a stored secret:
.PP
.EX
python -m keyring get netloom/clearpass <profile>/client-secret
.EE
.PP
In headless Linux or WSL-style environments, a keyring backend may need to be installed and unlocked explicitly:
.PP
.EX
sudo apt install -y gnome-keyring
dbus-run-session -- bash
echo 'choose-a-keyring-password' | gnome-keyring-daemon --unlock
python -m keyring set netloom/clearpass <profile>/client-secret
.EE
.PP
If NETLOOM_CLIENT_SECRET_REF is configured but no usable backend exists, the runtime only falls back to plaintext NETLOOM_CLIENT_SECRET when that value is also configured.
.SH DISCOVERY AND CACHE
.PP
The ClearPass plugin discovers API structure from documentation endpoints such as:
.IP "\[bu]" 2
/api-docs: top-level module and service discovery
.IP "\[bu]" 2
/api/apigility/documentation/<Module-v1>: action metadata, request field hints, and endpoint details for a module
.PP
Refresh discovery metadata when the ClearPass server is upgraded, when API features change, or when help/completion looks stale:
.PP
.EX
netloom cache clear
netloom cache update
.EE
.PP
The resulting cache powers shell completion, context-aware help, and command validation.
.PP
Service names shown in help and completion follow the canonical /api-docs names when available. For example, module help now prefers names such as certificate-chain, certificate-export, certificate-sign-request, onboard-device, and onboard-user instead of shorter path fragments such as chain or sign.
.SH PRIVILEGE-AWARE CATALOG
.PP
During netloom cache update the ClearPass plugin also queries /api/oauth/privileges for effective runtime privileges.
.PP
The plugin keeps the full discovered catalog, then builds a stricter default visible view from verified privilege mappings. This makes normal help, completion, and command discovery better match what the current API client can actually access.
.PP
To inspect the retained full discovery data:
.PP
.EX
netloom --catalog-view=full ?
netloom --catalog-view=full <module> <service> ?
netloom --catalog-view=full <module> <service> <action> ?
.EE
.PP
The default visible catalog remains the source of truth for normal help, completion, and command validation, so user-facing command lists only show baseline-accessible or privilege-verified services.
.SH FILTERING
.PP
When an endpoint supports server-side filtering, the ClearPass plugin accepts either shorthand filters or full JSON expressions.
.PP
Shorthand examples:
.PP
.EX
--filter=name:equals:TEST
--filter=name:contains:guest
--filter=id:in:1,2,3
--filter=enabled:exists:true
.EE
.PP
Supported shorthand operators:
.PP
.EX
equals
not-equals
contains
in
not-in
gt
gte
lt
lte
exists
.EE
.PP
Useful JSON patterns:
.PP
.EX
{"key":{"$eq":"value"}}
{"key":{"$contains":"value"}}
{"key":{"$in":["value1","value2"]}}
{"$and":[filter1,filter2]}
{"$or":[filter1,filter2]}
{"$not":{filter}}
.EE
.PP
Advanced JSON examples:
.PP
.EX
--filter='{"name":{"$contains":"TEST"}}'
--filter='{"$and":[{"name":{"$contains":"TEST"}},{"status":{"$eq":"Known"}}]}'
.EE
.PP
Shell quoting matters because JSON expressions are passed as strings.
.SH COMMON OPTIONS
.PP
The following common CLI options are especially relevant when working with the ClearPass plugin:
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--file=PATH: Path to JSON/CSV bulk payload input.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--out=PATH: Override the output file path.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--data-format=JSON|CSV|RAW: Output format (default: json).
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--csv-fieldnames=A,B,C: Fields and order for CSV output.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--filter=JSON|FIELD:OP:VALUE: Server-side filter applied across all matching pages.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--limit=N: Page size for list/get --all and copy requests.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--calculate-count=true|false: Request total count metadata.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--log-level=LEVEL: Select log level (default: info).
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--api-token=TOKEN: Use an existing bearer token.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--token-file=PATH: Load a bearer token from a file.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--encrypt=enable|disable: Mask or show secret fields.
.SH RANDOM PASSWORD ALIASES
.PP
For netloom toolsandutilities random-password add, the optional --random_password_method field accepts both the native ClearPass values and the new shorthand aliases:
.PP
.EX
1 | digits         -> nwa_digits_password         | Random digits
2 | letters        -> nwa_letters_password        | Random lowercase letters
3 | lettersdigits  -> nwa_lettersdigits_password  | Random lowercase letters & digits
4 | words          -> nwa_words_password          | Random words separated by a small number
5 | alnum          -> nwa_alnum_password          | Random letters & digits
6 | complex        -> nwa_complex_password        | At least one each: upper case, lower case, digit, and symbol
7 | strong         -> nwa_strong_password         | Random letters, digits and symbols
.EE
.PP
The full native values still work too.
.PP
.EX
netloom toolsandutilities random-password add --random_password_method=6
netloom toolsandutilities random-password add --random_password_method=strong
netloom toolsandutilities random-password add --random_password_method=nwa_strong_password
.EE
.SH COPY WORKFLOW
.PP
Preferred syntax:
.PP
.EX
netloom <module> <service> copy --from=SOURCE --to=TARGET [options]
.EE
.PP
Useful options include:
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--dry-run: Preview planned writes without changing the target profile.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--match-by=auto|name|id: Choose how target objects are matched.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--on-conflict=fail|skip|update|replace: Choose the write strategy when a match already exists.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--save-source=FILE: Save fetched source objects.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--save-payload=FILE: Save normalized write payloads.
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--save-plan=FILE: Save the planned operations.
.PP
The plugin normalizes payloads before replaying them so response-only metadata, links, IDs, and similar API noise are not sent back as write input.
.SH DIFF WORKFLOW
.PP
Preferred syntax:
.PP
.EX
netloom <module> <service> diff --from=SOURCE --to=TARGET [options]
.EE
.PP
Useful options include:
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--match-by=auto|name|id
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--all
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--filter=JSON|FIELD:OP:VALUE
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--fields=FIELD1,FIELD2
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--ignore-fields=FIELD1,FIELD2
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--out=FILE
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--show-all
.IP "\[bu]" 2
--max-items=N
.PP
Broad selectors such as --all and --filter produce symmetric reports with same, different, only_in_source, and only_in_target statuses. Narrow selectors such as --id and --name stay source-scoped and primarily answer whether the chosen source object matches an object in the target profile.
.SH TROUBLESHOOTING
.PP
If a profile is not behaving as expected, start with:
.PP
.EX
netloom server show
.EE
.PP
If help or completion looks incomplete, refresh the cache:
.PP
.EX
netloom cache update
.EE
.PP
If a module or service seems to be missing for the current API client, inspect the retained catalog:
.PP
.EX
netloom --catalog-view=full ?
.EE
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
.EX
netloom identities endpoint list --limit=10
netloom identities endpoint list --filter=name:contains:guest
netloom policyelements network-device get --id=1001
netloom policyelements network-device copy --from=<source-profile> --to=<target-profile> --all --dry-run
netloom policyelements role diff --from=<source-profile> --to=<target-profile> --all
netloom policyelements network-device add ?
netloom certificateauthority certificate-chain --help
netloom certificateauthority ?
  certificate-chain          Get a certificate and its trust chain
  certificate-export         Export a certificate or certificate signing request
  onboard-device             Manage Onboard devices
.EE
.SH SEE ALSO
.IP "\[bu]" 2
man/netloom.md
.IP "\[bu]" 2
netloom/data/man/netloom-clearpass.7
